So, welcome to Flat Shading Low Poly Landscapes! What we're going to do in this video
is quite a lot actually, and you don't need to understand all of the details.
We will revisit some of these things later. This would be five or six videos, if we go into too
much detail. But the end result will be, I will show you how to make a landscape with a lot lower
geometric detail like this, where you can actually come in and
paint on the landscape, in very simple flat colors,
like your grass here or your dirt. And where we create
a very special type of material which uses this collection of
nodes, which I'll briefly explain but not go into a huge amount of detail about how it works,
to make the terrain flat shade, which is what's giving this effect here where
each of these faces are looking like flat faces.
OK, that's the magic source is what we do in here with these nodes. So, let's dive in
and show you how to create the option for a low poly terrain, if that's your preference.
So, before you make your decision, whether you want to pursue the high poly
route or the low poly route, I just want to talk about the implications. One of the things
is that Unreal's tools are actually really powerful and will help you make a very photo
real looking external landscape, with only a few more hours work than we've done so far.
The disadvantage of that is that, you've just set the bar for the rest of your game.
Now suddenly, if a player sees the scenery is that realistic, they're probably going to expect
everything else they see to be realistic. There are ways around this.
Think of games like The Vanishing of Ethan Carter, for example,
or Everybody's Gone to the Rapture. Those type of games are absolutely beautiful
environments, but there's very little interactivity. You see, if you want a
photo real environment with photo real characters, like GTA 5
type thing, you're talking about spending 1,000 man years of effort
to produce it, and a lot of that goes into the art, sound, stroytelling,
etc. etc. So, be careful how high you set the bar. Some people may choose
to set a low poly bar for all of their assets, and
then, you can really focus on the core gameplay. So, let's see how we would make this low poly.
What we're going to do is just go to the World Outliner and
delete the landscape. Now, if you choose, by the way, to stick with high poly,
as I said just don't do this, just watch this through out of interest, and in the challenge you can use
the time, instead of making a low poly landscape, you can use that time to tweak your existing
landscape. But I'm going to go ahead and nuke my landscape, bravely, and I'm going to make a new one.
Now, this new one, the difference is going to be that the X and the Y scale are going to be
1,000 centimeters or 10 meters. So, these quads are 10 meter
quads now, what's what make it low poly. Now, 500 loads of 10
meters is a bit too big, this is a 5 by 5 kilometer terrain right now.
So, I'm going to drop the number of quads and the number of components,
till we get to 106 by 106, so that's 1.06 kilometers
on either side. Same sort of scale as before with much less
quad density, much lower density of information that we can put in,
in terms of the shape of the terrain. So that's it, there's our new terrain
layout! Now, let's go start in just a small region, and I'll
show you how to do the low poly stuff. And if you're going down this route, I'll give you plenty of time in the challenge.
Same stuff, we model, we pull up, and if I'm going to do it from a slightly lower
viewpoint. Now, it's not actually super apparent how
kind of low poly this is, right now, because this preview mesh that we have
here is actually what we call smooth shaded right now, which means that the
lighting is treating this surface as if it's smooth. What we're going to have to
do is try and force the system to start shading this landscape, as
if everything is flat, and that's a little bit trickier than we may
hope and I'll show you how to do it right now. So, here is a piece of
landscape. We can imagine putting mountains around the rest, but let's show you how to get to the shading that we want.
What we do is make ourselves a new
material. I'm just going to call it Flat,
FlatLand. OK, so I've got a material called FlatLand. Remember
with a landscape material, the first thing you want to do is scroll down to Usage and say Used
with Landscape, as we did before. Fantastic! Now, this is where the voodoo
starts coming in. How on earth are we going to make this
multi-colored? Well, firstly we're going to play the same trick as we did
before, with the base colors. In fact, you could have duplicated your landscape,
that's another way of doing it. Let's do that actually. Let me just, rather than
making FlatLand like this, let's duplicate Landscape and then
call it FlandLand. OK, there's an alternative for you.
If you go into that, of course, it'll already have these two colors, OK,
and it's already setup as a landscape texture. So, let's try using this
one, this FlatLand texture on this new landscape. So,
there's the landscape, enter details, choose FlatLand. Now we
need to go ahead and paint, of course, so popping over to there.
Now, of course, your paint... You won't be able to see what's going on with this painting, until your shaders
have finished compiling. So, let's just give those a moment to finish compiling.
And we're going to need to make ourselves new
layer information. You see it's saying there's no layer information assigned? So, let's go ahead
and make new layer information layers. Now,
sometimes it can get stuck in a dialog here, so we may need to just select elsewhere. There
we go! So, Grass_LayerInfo_Flat
is what I'm going to call this one, and this is the map
of where the grass is and then Dirt_LayerInfo_Flat.
Cool! Now we have the layers, we're able to start
painting the grass, and here it goes! So, there's the grass on the low lands,
here in front of me, fine, and then, the dirt and we could worry about snow
a little bit later. Now, if this happens to you, it all just goes wrong like this. This is just because the shaders
need to recompile, so bear with it for a second and it will come back
in a second. OK, here we go! Now, you want the Tool Strength to be  very high, so you don't end up with
a mix of two different things. And you can see that OK, sure,
it's low poly, but it doesn't really look low poly. This is not what we mean by low poly,
and the reason is, the way the shader is shading this stuff
smoothly. So, how are we going to make it shade non-smoothly? Now that we've got a
landscape like this, let me show you. I'm going to go back. Have I got it open? No.
I'm going to go back to my Content and
then back to the root, FlatLand. What we're going to need to do is something a bit
cleaver, with the normals. Normals are little lines the affectively stick out
of the surface of the vertices. They stick out of each of the vertices on the
landscape, and they tell the shader how light should interact with that
surface. What we need to do is, we need to make all of the
normals, for a given flat face, point in the same direction. So,
if we were to, instead of being in lit mode here, if we were to go in say
Wireframe mode... I'm just going to suppress the Sky Sphere
for a moment. There you go! These are the quads, you can see them. What's
happening is that little normals are sticking out of all of these vertices
at an angle, that's kind of the average of all the faces around it. Little
hairs are effectively sticking out. And then, what the shader is doing is, if I've got a normal sticking
out of this vertex up into the air and another one sticking out down here, the
shader is interpolating all along the line, so that it
assumes that you didn't actually want this thing to be as rigid as it is, that you want it to appear
smooth. So, it interpolates in between and we get this overly
smooth result. We're going to have to force all
normals, that are on the same face, to point in the same direction,
so that this entire triangle, for example, that I'm highlighting now,
has exactly the same angle to the light, rather than having little
hairs that stick out, in a very organic way. Imagine that the
mesh here is like the skin of an animal and that their normals are hairs sticking on the skin,
and those normals tell the light how to interact with it. You can find out a lot more about normals
by just searching, for example, on Google.
And here, there's a picture of normals there, from Autodesk. These are
face normals. We're actually using vertex normals inside
Unreal, which is more like this sphere here. You see each vertex has a little hair sticking
out. What we're wanting is, each pixel wants to be treated
as if every normal points in the same direction, let me show you. This is quite advanced, so if you just want to
use this technology rather than fully understand it for now, that's absolutely fine.
So, what we're going to do is go and find ourselves,
from the Coordinates dropdown, there's a node called WorldPosition
OK, and what that's going to tell us is, it's going to give us a map
of the WorldPosition from our viewpoint. Now it doesn't actually matter whether it's the
Absolute World Position or the Camera Relative World Position, but it gives a
vector to the surface at every point. That's the point from where we're
standing. Let me carry on, then explain in context how this works, alright.
Now, this is where it gets really weird. We're going to use a couple of features that we can
pull off the shader, called DDX and DDY,
and these are partial differentials in X and Y, which is quite mathematical.
But what we're saying here, by taking a differential in X and Y,
is we're saying when we look at this landscape, as we're doing now...
Let's put it into Wireframe. We want
to say find me places where the change
of slope, or whether slope in X and Y it doesn't really matter whether
X and Y is the world space X and Y or screen space, but in two dimensions,
the slope is not changing basically. We only want to change the shading
at an edge, when the slope of the face changes. So, we're finding
the slope of the face or the slope of the thing we're looking at, in two dimensions here with this
DDX and DDY. Then, we're going to do something called a
maths CrossProduct between the two,
and what that does is, it makes us a little vector, effectively makes us a face normal. It
makes a bunch of lines stick out of the face at 90 degrees,
one for each pixel, and we pump that into the normal. Now that is not
intuitive. It's the sort of solution you'll find on the web, but no one will explain exactly how it works.
We're going to have to do this in a spiral way. I could sit and teach you about
CrossProducts and Partial Differentials, and we'd be here another 10 hours before you've got all
the requisite knowledge. So, the point of this set of nodes here,
that I've just made, is to force all
of the pixels to be rendered the same until you get to a change of face. That's the idea. Let's
see it in practice. we're overriding the normal vectors
for the pixels of our terrain.
So, you click Save, once it's finished saving you can come out of it, but then, you're
going to have to wait until you can see the effect.
So, here is the preview again! Ah, you see now that's doing exactly what we want.
The blending is a little bit weird in places but that is what we're after.
OK, and then given that, you can even just come back to the landscape tools
and we can just take the dirt, paint the dirt where we want it, and
we can paint the grass where we want it. And we can raise and lower the terrain and all
the things that we've been doing before. Sculpt,
Circle Brush, nice large brush you see, and we're actually
generating a low poly terrain. Now, we get some blending between the different cells,
so the green and the gray blend into each other,
but that's absolutely fine, that's pretty manageable.
So, back to paint, for example, come here and put some dirt up here, and
you see that's working, so we have a low poly terrain setup. So what I'm going to leave on the
screen is this node setup for you. This we will
revisit this type of stuff, as and when necessary, but just
bear in mind we are detecting flatness basically and forcing
faces to shade flat, because unfortunately with a landscape type
material there's no simple button we can click to say render this flat or certainly nothing that
I know of. You could add in a third color here. You would just add in another vector
parameter, which you would put in, say snow, and then, you would have three colors.
So, that's what I want you to do! I want you to choose your final landscape style! Decide which
route you want to pursue. If it's high poly, then use this time to tweak the existing terrain
you've got. I'm going to pursue high poly, I think, through the rest of the course, because
that's been the consensus. I want to show you, in the upcoming iteration of
terrain, I want to show you how to use Height Maps and import those sort of things. So, ultimately
I'm showing you both techniques. But if you decide low poly, then create your initial landscape like
I just did. Remember to leave a flat area in the middle of that landscape,
and then, share the result with the rest of us so we can see, either on
Facebook or in the Questions and Answers, what you've done, because we'll be really interested to see your
low poly result. I'm not going to flesh my low poly terrain out anymore, as I say,
because on the next iteration, I'm going to show you how to import a Height Map, as a third
alternative to terrain generation.